---
layout: single
title:  "Gossip, Guanxi, and Guesswork: Time to Demystify the Chinese Leadership"
date:   2016-06-23
categories: Research&Writing
tags: [Xi Jinping, leadership, MERICS]
classes: wide
excerpt: "MERICS / 2016-06-23"
---
#### The dynamics of Chinese politics have changed considerably under Xi Jinping. In [“China’s Core Executive,” the first MERICS Paper on China](http://www.merics.org/en/merics-analysis/papers-on-china/chinas-core-executive-leadership-styles-structures-and-processes-under-xi-jinping/), international China experts examine decision-making structures and processes in Xi’s China. But before we start to debate leadership in China, [Jessica Batke](http://www.merics.org/en/team/fellows/former-visiting-fellows/jessica-batke/) challenges us to check our own frame of reference for analysing Chinese politics and policy.

**Originally published on the [MERICS website](https://blog.merics.org/en/blog-post/2016/06/23/gossip-guanxi-and-guesswork-time-to-demystify-the-chinese-leadership/)**

*This
article reflects the personal views of the author and not necessarily
the views of the U.S. Government or the Department of State.*


--- <br>



We’ve tended to view Chinese policy and politics through the prism of *guanxi*
 (connections) and factions—somewhat specialized “China” categories that
 help us make sense of the black box of Chinese leadership politics.
 But are we relying too heavily on terms like “*guanxi*” and “factions,” preventing us from thinking about Chinese politics in a more cross-cutting, relevant way?  


[Recent research](http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online&amp;aid=10319501&amp;fulltextType=RA&amp;fileId=S159824081500003X)
 suggests that several of the categories we previously used to assign
Chinese officials to a particular faction, such as birthplace, are not
especially relevant.  The one category that has a significant effect on
later hiring and promotion is whether or not two individuals have
previously worked together.  Yet, even this seems quite similar to how
hiring and promotion functions outside of China.  Are we prepared to say
 that previous personal connections or, especially, shared work
experience are not major factors in promotions in Western democracies?  
Or are we ready to start assigning Western leaders to particular
factions because of their work histories?  There are certainly cases
when China’s *guanxi* culture has unique effects on hiring and
promotion.  But we should be cautious of discussing all personnel issues
 within that special, China-only framework—doing so elides possible
useful points of comparison with other governments.


#### Mao ran a poor country, Xi administers a wealthy nation


A question I’m constantly asking myself is whether contemporary China
 shares more similarities with the China of 1950 or with a European
country of today.  The rapid social, economic, technological, and, yes,
political change over the last 65 years at least raises the question of
whether it is relevant to think about the current Chinese leadership
wholly in terms of past Chinese leaders.  General Secretary Xi Jinping,
for example, has a lot more to manage and, in some ways, fewer options
than his predecessors.  In stark contrast with Mao, who was running a
poor, war-torn country with little to lose, Xi must administer an
increasingly wealthy nation with an increasingly expectant population,
and do so within the framework of the CCP as a [“governing” rather than a “revolutionary” party](https://sinocism.com/?p=11381).


Likewise, in the years before World War I, U.S. President Woodrow Wilson apparently “[worked four hours a day, slept nine hours a night, [and] played golf regularly](http://www.shapell.org/manuscript/woodrow-wilson-white-house).”
 Clearly, the demands of running the United States 100 years ago are
nothing like they are today.  China has undergone a similar national
transformation in an even shorter timeframe.  We should therefore think
through which of the goals, methods, and functions of contemporary
Chinese leaders are directly comparable to those of previous
generations.


#### Public policy trumps personal goals


The fact that the CCP has so far survived this sometimes-wrenching
transformation does, however, tell us something about internal
leadership priorities and struggles. Looking at all the [different ways](https://history.state.gov/milestones/1989-1992/collapse-soviet-union) [a state](http://www.ibtimes.co.uk/arab-spring-5-years-timeline-major-events-uprisings-middle-east-1539085) [can fail](http://www.theatlantic.com/magazine/archive/2008/12/timeline-somalia-1991-2008/307190/),
 it is no small feat that China is still in one piece, let alone in an
increasingly powerful international position. This suggests that,
despite all the waste, corruption, and personal enrichment that have
come along with CCP rule, the leadership since reform and opening has
ultimately prioritised public policy over personal goals. This doesn’t
mean that Chinese leaders are perfectly clean or altruistic. Nor does it
 mean that “public policy” in China translates into Western governance
ideals such as a free press or robust protections for human rights. But
it does mean that Chinese leaders have managed (sometimes by the [slimmest](https://books.google.de/books?id=DV3yfm6oblAC&amp;pg=PA152&amp;lpg=PA152&amp;dq=deng+li+peng+tiananmen+zhao&amp;source=bl&amp;ots=L1fsgyqxSj&amp;sig=2XdvL4ZqgSe5rpPEnjl1yZXsfTs&amp;hl=en&amp;sa=X&amp;ved=0ahUKEwiO2tO5kqrNAhWLXRQKHdryApAQ6AEIRzAG#v=onepage&amp;q=deng%20li%20peng%20tiananmen%20zhao&amp;f=false) of [margins](http://www.bbc.com/news/world-asia-china-17673505)) to rise above political fighting to keep a grip on one of the world’s largest and most complex states.  


What does this mean for how we analyse Chinese leadership politics?
Because we have limited access to Chinese leaders, we often use
factional or institutional frameworks to help us speculate about a
particular leader’s motivations. Our default assumption is that a leader
 supports a particular stance for factional or institutional reasons.
But this view can overlook the role that individual agency plays in
policy decisions, including perhaps forming [looser networks of policy coalitions](http://journals.cambridge.org/action/displayAbstract?fromPage=online&amp;aid=10319501&amp;fulltextType=RA&amp;fileId=S159824081500003X) depending on the issue at hand—something more akin to what we might see in other types of governments.


A better starting point may be to ask what possible public policy (in
 the Chinese context) goals a leadership decision might have, and then
to look for evidence why this may or may not be the case.  Leaders’
personal views, political intrigue, and bureaucratic infighting can all
be incorporated into this framework—[and sometimes they may end up being the entire story](http://www.scmp.com/news/china/article/1064705/two-women-injured-ling-gu-ferrari-crash-are-named-magazine)—but by prioritizing personal politics over policy as a starting point for our analysis, we may be missing a larger story.  
