---
layout: single
title:  "Has the Foreign NGO Law Changed the Work of Foreign NGOs in China?"
date:   2018-01-10
categories: Research&Writing
tags: [The China NGO Project, ChinaFile, Foreign NGO Law]
classes: wide
excerpt: "The China NGO Project / 2018-01-10"
---

**By Jessica Batke and Chen Qi Hang**

**This article originally appeared on ChinaFile’s [The China NGO Project](http://www.chinafile.com/ngo/analysis/has-foreign-ngo-law-changed-work-of-foreign-ngos-china).**



--- <br>

The advent of the Foreign NGO Law in January left
many wondering what it portended for foreign NGOs’ work China. How many
foreign NGOs would be able to register? Where in the mainland would they
 be able to operate? And how might the new registration and filing
processes change the kind of work foreign NGOs would be able to carry
out legally?

The first two of these questions have now been
answered, at least partially. Data from the Ministry of Public Security
(MPS) shows that a total of 461 foreign NGOs have either registered one
or multiple representative office(s) or carried out one or multiple
temporary activities between January 1 and December 15, 2017. Of these,
250 foreign NGOs successfully registered at least one representative
office and 204 carried out at least one temporary activity. (Note that
some foreign NGOs both registered representative offices and carried out
 temporary activities, meaning they have been counted twice in the
preceding numbers.) In terms of geographic scope, 105 of the 293
registered representative offices are permitted to work throughout
mainland China, whereas only 13 temporary activities that began by
December 15 were nationwide in scope.

Yet, it is difficult to know
 what kind of change these statistics represent. Historical data about
foreign NGOs operating in China is spotty: estimates for the number of
foreign NGOs that had been working in China before 2017 range from [1,000](http://www.ecfr.eu/page/-/CA_1511_NGO_Final.pdf) to [7,000](http://www.chinanews.com/gn/2016/03-04/7784292.shtml).
 We have even less information about where these thousands of NGOs had
been working—or in which sectors. Thus we have little quantitative basis
 to assess how the Foreign NGO Law might be affecting international
groups’ work in China.

In an attempt to establish such a basis for
 comparison, The China NGO Project turned to China Development Brief
(CDB), a non-profit focused on civil society in China that maintains a
directory of NGOs operating there. From CDB’s directory, we compiled a
list of all the international organizations whose CDB entry included
information about the organization’s “sector” of work. From this list of
 366 relevant entries, we coded each for the NGO’s field of work and
geographic area of operations, based on the “sector” and “region”
information provided in the directory. Separately, we coded the
MPS-sourced data for field of work and geographic scope based on the
descriptions of the NGOs’ activities on the MPS website. We combined
representative office and temporary activity data to make this dataset
more comparable to the CDB dataset. We also removed organizations that
work only on trade-related issues (as trade-only organizations were not
represented in the CDB directory). This left us with a list of 339
relevant NGOs from the MPS-sourced data. We used these two sets of
data—the coded CDB data and the combined MPS data—as the basis for our
comparative analysis. Though this method isn’t a perfect
before-and-after comparison tool, it can help us make an educated guess
at how foreign NGOs’ work—or at least the public representations of that
 work—may have changed since the Foreign NGO Law went into effect.

**Table 1. Foreign NGOs’ Fields of Work, as Represented in CDB and MPS Data**

<table class="sortable">
  <thead><tr class="tableizer-firstrow"><th>Field of Work</th><th>Number of CDB Directory NGOs</th><th>Number of MPS Dataset NGOs</th></tr></thead><tbody>
 <tr><td>Aging</td><td>22</td><td>13</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Agriculture</td><td>38</td><td>7</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Animal Protection</td><td>8</td><td>8</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Arts and Culture</td><td>13</td><td>32</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Civil Society Capacity-Building</td><td>169</td><td>40</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Disabilities</td><td>31</td><td>31</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Disaster Relief</td><td>18</td><td>30</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Economic Development</td><td>5</td><td>30</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Education</td><td>121</td><td>157</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Energy</td><td>0</td><td>6</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Environment</td><td>114</td><td>54</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Ethnic Affairs</td><td>7</td><td>7</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Gender Issues</td><td>21</td><td>15</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Health</td><td>59</td><td>73</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Infrastructure</td><td>0</td><td>23</td></tr>
 <tr><td>International Relations/Exchange</td><td>2</td><td>64</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Labor</td><td>15</td><td>13</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Law and Governance</td><td>15</td><td>21</td></tr>
 <tr><td>LGBTQ Issues</td><td>9</td><td>0</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Media</td><td>6</td><td>2</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Migrants</td><td>11</td><td>4</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Poverty Alleviation</td><td>42</td><td>47</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Religion</td><td>6</td><td>3</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Rural Issues/Development</td><td>56</td><td>17</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Sport</td><td>0</td><td>9</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Technology</td><td>0</td><td>22</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Tourism</td><td>0</td><td>6</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Trade</td><td>1</td><td>40</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Urban Issues/Development</td><td>0</td><td>13</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Youth</td><td>27</td><td>83</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Unknown</td><td>0</td><td>2</td></tr>
</tbody></table>

Several of these categories appear to differ markedly between the CDB
and MPS data, which is likely due to artifacts of data collection and
labelling. For example, in the Chinese version of the CDB directory,
many NGOs described their work using a pithy phrase in Chinese (“三农与扶贫”)
 that translates roughly to “agriculture, rural residents, rural areas,
and poverty alleviation.” Without more specific information, we coded
these groups as working on agriculture, rural issues, and poverty
alleviation, even if they may have only been working in only one of
those fields. Similarly, the CDB directory often used one sector
category that combined gender (women’s) issues and LGBTQ issues; one
that combined arts and culture, religious issues, and ethnic minority
issues; and one that combined labor issues and migrant issues. In each
of these cases we erred on the side of over-inclusiveness, perhaps
artificially inflating these numbers in the CDB data. Infrastructure did
 not appear as a sector category in the CDB data, likely reflecting the
fact that it simply was not included as a separate category in CDB’s
collection effort.<br/>

Other large differences between the CDB and MPS data reflect the
manner in which the MPS has defined and regulated the non-profit sector
under the Foreign NGO Law. Industry associations are indeed run as
non-profits, but for most people, the primary association with “NGO” is
charitable work. While trade and industry associations are lumped in
with other foreign NGOs in China under the Foreign NGO Law, they were
not included in the CDB directory. The numbers for sports and tourism
groups reflect the same phenomenon. Though a few foreign NGOs were coded
 under “international relations/exchange” in the CDB data, their small
number again likely represents the self-selection mechanism at play for
“NGOs” who were included in CDB’s directory.

Other differences,
while still partially an artifact of data processing, probably also
represent notable shifts in China’s non-profit sector. “Technology,”
“urban issues,” and “energy” did not appear in the CDB directory, but
they are emerging sectors of non-profit work.

Finally, one major
difference between the two datasets is likely the result of both data
processing and significant changes in how foreign NGOs choose to
represent their work in China. What we have chosen to call “civil
society capacity-building” in our coding scheme encompassed a wide range
 of labels in the CDB data, including “capacity
building/research/support/information,” “community development,” and
“social innovation/social enterprise.” By filing all of the NGOs under
these categories under “civil society capacity-building,” we likely
inflated the number of groups coded as such. We suspect, however, that
this difference might also reflect changes in how foreign NGOs describe
their work in the new environment; we code MPS data based on the
information provided on the MPS website, which was likely drawn from
NGOs’ application materials and worded in such a way as to reassure
Chinese authorities about foreign NGOs’ benign intentions. Therefore,
this discrepancy probably hints at a change in how foreign NGOs are
choosing to represent themselves, even if it does not tell whether the
NGOs’ work itself has altered.

Setting aside all of these somewhat
 problematic categories, we can take a closer look at the foreign NGO
fields of work that are most directly comparable across the CDB and MPS
data:

**Table 2. Selected Foreign NGOs’ Fields of Work, as Represented in CDB and MPS Data**


<table class="sortable">
  <thead><tr class="tableizer-firstrow"><th>Field of Work</th><th>Number of CDB Directory NGOs</th><th>Number of MPS Dataset NGOs</th></tr></thead><tbody>
 <tr><td>Aging</td><td>22</td><td>13</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Animal Protection</td><td>8</td><td>8</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Disabilities</td><td>31</td><td>31</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Disaster Relief</td><td>18</td><td>30</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Education</td><td>121</td><td>157</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Environment</td><td>114</td><td>54</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Health</td><td>59</td><td>73</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Law and Governance</td><td>15</td><td>21</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Media</td><td>6</td><td>2</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Youth</td><td>27</td><td>83</td></tr>
</tbody></table>

From these data, it appears that particular fields have seen a spike
in foreign NGO engagement in 2017—or at the very least, a spike in the
number of NGOs who have been able to successfully file or register under
 the new legal regime. These more popular fields are disaster relief,
education, health, and youth, which also happen to closely align with
ongoing government efforts to improve quality of life for its poorer
citizens. Unexpectedly, however, elder care does not seem to have fared
as well under the Foreign NGO Law, despite the fact that it is also a
relatively high priority for the government. Environmentally-focused
groups, meanwhile, appear relatively frequently among active NGOs this
past year, but they are still much fewer in number than were represented
 in the CDB data.

\* \* \*

Owing
 to a lack of clarity (or, in many cases, missing entries) in the CDB
data, we have a much smaller set of usable data related to the locations
 of foreign NGOs’ work. We marked unclear or missing CDB location
entries, which make up over a third of the CDB data, as “unknown.”
Further, many NGOs had “nationwide” listed as their area of operation,
though it is unlikely that all of these groups were truly operating in
every province; more likely, given that there was no legal or
administrative approval process tied to one’s listing in the CDB
directory, the selection of “nationwide” reflected a relatively broad
but not absolutely all-inclusive geographic scope. (Though “Xinjiang
Bingtuan” is not included in any entries in CDB’s data, it is also the
least-tagged in the MPS data.)

**Table 3. Foreign NGOs’ Areas of Operation, as Represented in CDB and MPS Data**

<table class="sortable">
  <thead><tr class="tableizer-firstrow"><th>Geographic Area</th><th>Number of CDB Directory NGOs</th><th>Number of MPS Dataset NGOs</th></tr></thead><tbody>
 <tr><td>All of China</td><td>113</td><td>72</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Anhui</td><td>5</td><td>27</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Beijing</td><td>17</td><td>94</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Chongqing</td><td>3</td><td>42</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Fujian</td><td>1</td><td>36</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Gansu</td><td>9</td><td>37</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Guangdong</td><td>16</td><td>74</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Guangxi</td><td>16</td><td>26</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Guizhou</td><td>9</td><td>32</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Hainan</td><td>4</td><td>15</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Hebei</td><td>7</td><td>31</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Heilongjiang</td><td>2</td><td>30</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Henan</td><td>5</td><td>25</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Hubei</td><td>4</td><td>33</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Hunan</td><td>6</td><td>29</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Inner Mongolia</td><td>5</td><td>27</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Jiangsu</td><td>5</td><td>36</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Jiangxi</td><td>1</td><td>22</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Jilin</td><td>1</td><td>25</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Liaoning</td><td>1</td><td>28</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Ningxia</td><td>3</td><td>19</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Qinghai</td><td>8</td><td>30</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Shaanxi</td><td>6</td><td>34</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Shandong</td><td>1</td><td>40</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Shanghai</td><td>9</td><td>37</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Shanxi</td><td>3</td><td>19</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Sichuan</td><td>26</td><td>64</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Tianjin</td><td>2</td><td>35</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Tibet</td><td>11</td><td>11</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Xinjiang</td><td>6</td><td>18</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Xinjiang Bingtuan</td><td>0</td><td>10</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Yunnan</td><td>25</td><td>57</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Zhejiang</td><td>1</td><td>48</td></tr>
 <tr><td>Unknown</td><td>179</td><td>3</td></tr>
</tbody></table>

The high number of “unknown” areas of operation in the CDB database
makes any confident comparison hazardous. Still, we can (cautiously)
glean a few tidbits of information from these figures. The fact that
several of the most popular places for foreign NGOs to work, including
Beijing, Guangdong, Yunnan, and Sichuan, are consistent from the CDB to
the MPS data tells us that those areas are indeed relative hotbeds of
foreign NGO activity in China, and are not simply popular under the new
legal regime because they happen to have smoother registration and
filing processes. At the same time, however, it does appear that fewer
foreign NGOs, relatively speaking, are able to work in Tibet under the
Foreign NGO Law. Given that Chinese authorities continue to perceive
Tibet and Tibetan issues as highly-charged and threatening, it is
certainly not a surprise that Tibet might be one of the places where
authorities find the Foreign NGO Law a useful tool to minimize foreign
non-profits’ presence—if, indeed, increased restrictions on foreigners’
travel to Tibet don’t hinder NGOs from applying to work there in the
first place.


#### Methodology Notes

Using both the [Chinese](http://www.chinadevelopmentbrief.org.cn/directindex.html)- and [English](http://chinadevelopmentbrief.cn/directory/)-language
 versions of the CDB directory (there is some overlap between the two,
but they each contain some unique entries), we compiled all the
international organizations listed and removed any duplicates. This
produced a list of 399 foreign NGOs, which we then reviewed and tagged
with one or more “[fields of work](http://www.chinafile.com/ngo/analysis/six-months-analysis-of-foreign-ngo-activity-china)”
 based on the “sector” designations provided in the CDB directory. If
the directory only listed “other” as the NGO’s “sector,” we removed it
from consideration. We also removed any entities that were U.N.-related
organizations, foreign embassies or consulates, or any entities
obviously entered into the CDB directory after the Foreign NGO Law went
into effect (the vast majority of entries showing such metadata were
input between 2011 and 2014). That left us with 366 organizations that
we used as a “baseline,” against which the 2017 MPS data could be
compared, to take a closer look at how the Foreign NGO Law might be
affecting the type and location of international non-profit work in
China.

Of course, this method could not create a perfect tool for
comparison. First, the CDB directory is not comprehensive; though there
may be fewer than 7,000 foreign NGOs in China, the number is certainly
more than the 366 we have included in our data from the CDB directory.

Second,
 the CDB directory does not distinguish between “representative offices”
 and “temporary activities”—that is a distinction that exists only under
 the Foreign NGO Law. This means that we cannot draw direct, one-to-one
comparisons for “representative offices” and “temporary activities.”
However, in order to make the CDB and MPS data more comparable, we
combined the MPS representative office and temporary activity data into
one set, essentially creating a database of all the foreign NGOs that
have gone through some MPS process to work in China between January 1
and December 15, 2017. We removed any foreign NGOs that are only engaged
 in trade-related work (such as industry associations), to better match
the sort of data contained in the CDB directory, leaving us with 339 MPS
 entries to use for comparison.

Third, as CDB’s directory is
opt-in, the NGOs who choose to be represented there are more likely to
engage in work Beijing does not consider controversial, and thus be
comfortable publicly listing their work, meaning that it is not a
representative sample of all the types of foreign NGOs historically
present in China. It also means that data provision and collection was
not complete for all NGOs.

Fourth, the CDB database does not
indicate whether an NGO was still present in China when the Foreign NGO
Law went into effect. It’s simply a snapshot of foreign NGOs that wished
 to have their information included in the database at some point
between 2011 and 2016. Some of the NGOs included in the directory may
have stopped working in China well before the Foreign NGO Law went into
effect.
