---
layout: single
title:  "Here’s How NGOs Are Allowed to Operate in the P.R.C., Hong Kong, and the United States"
date:   2018-06-06
categories: Research&Writing
tags: [The China NGO Project, ChinaFile, Foreign NGO Law, Hong Kong]
classes: wide
excerpt: "The China NGO Project / 2018-06-06"
---

**By Anita Venanzi, Vincent Chong and Jessica Batke**

**This article originally appeared on ChinaFile’s [The China NGO Project](http://www.chinafile.com/ngo/analysis/heres-how-ngos-are-allowed-operate-prc-hong-kong-and-united-states).**



--- <br>

The last year has seen extensive discussion of China’s Foreign NGO Law, focusing especially on whether or not the law would [cause a major shift](http://www.chinafile.com/ngo/analysis/has-foreign-ngo-law-changed-work-of-foreign-ngos-china)
 in the kind of work foreign NGOs are able to do in the mainland. Less
often examined, however, is how China’s new regulatory structure differs
 from those of other countries or territories. The most obvious
comparison is with other countries, [such as Russia](http://www.chinafile.com/ngo/analysis/comparing-recent-ngo-laws-russia-and-china),
 that have also recently implemented laws aimed at foreign non-profits.
Russian NGOs’ footprint in China is relatively small (as of June 1,
2018, only two NGOs of Russian origin had registered or carried out an
activity in China), but it could be more helpful to examine the
differences between NGO regulation in China and in countries that have
large numbers of NGOs operating in China.

The overwhelming majority of foreign NGOs now legally operating in
the People’s Republic of China (P.R.C.) under the Foreign NGO Law are
incorporated in Hong Kong and the United States. How do Hong Kong and
U.S. foreign NGO regulatory structures compare with that of mainland
China’s? More specifically, for NGOs coming from Hong Kong and the
United States, how different a legal operating environment should they
expect? Does China’s Foreign NGO Law really differ all that much from
what is in place in Hong Kong and the United States?

Comparing laws on NGOs in different jurisdictions allows us to see
more clearly the kinds of challenges foreign non-profits may face when
adapting their work from their place of origin to mainland China. It
also illuminates provisions in the United States, though dusty with
disuse, that have the potential to restrict foreign NGO activity within
U.S. borders as well.

### Regulating Foreign NGOs, or NGOs that Happen to Be Foreign

The first challenge when comparing China’s, Hong Kong’s, and the
United States’ non-profit regulations is a definitional one. The P.R.C.
clearly distinguishes between foreign and domestic NGOs—so much so that
it produced two separate laws to regulate them. A non-profit
organization incorporated outside mainland China must adhere to an
entirely separate set of provisions than one that was incorporated
within China’s borders. This domestic-foreign distinction as a primary
sorting mechanism is not the case in either the United States or Hong
Kong, which primarily address NGOs through tax status and not national
origin. Thus “foreign NGO” as a legal label is only applicable in the
P.R.C.

Beyond this definitional question, we can look at how legislation in
these three locations treats NGOs that happen to be foreign. In
comparison to Hong Kong and the United States, NGOs in mainland China
are subject to closer and more frequent monitoring from the state. This
is couched in terms of national security, and indeed is one of the
stated reasons why the P.R.C. chose to regulate foreign NGOs differently
 than it does domestic ones. The P.R.C. also imposes much more severe
constraints on foreign NGOs’ sources of funding.

In contrast, U.S. and Hong Kong legislation concerning NGOs is less
centralized, leaving NGOs in those places with a higher level of agency.
 In particular, NGOs in Hong Kong can choose from a variety of legal
forms of incorporation to find the one that benefits their organization
the most. These NGOs also enjoy a high degree of autonomy, with no
government entity monitoring their activities unless they receive money
from the Hong Kong government. In the U.S., limitations on NGOs’ funding
 and activities are [the result](http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0899764013481111) of 9/11 and are focused on forestalling terrorism-related activity.

This relatively permissive situation in the United States, however,
could see some changes as legislators and regulators attempt to beef up
the Foreign Agents Registration Act (FARA). FARA, a 1938 law designed to
 combat Nazi propaganda, sat [mostly unused](https://www.natlawreview.com/article/foreign-agents-registration-act-fara-guide-perplexed) in the intervening years, until U.S. government agencies began to [express interest](https://www.natlawreview.com/article/foreign-agents-registration-act-fara-guide-perplexed)
 in more aggressive enforcement in the mid-2010s. The statute mandates
that a “foreign agent,” or anyone acting on behalf of a “foreign
principal” to influence U.S. policy, register with the Department of
Justice. Now, as several bills to strengthen FARA’s provisions [make their way](https://www.cov.com/-/media/files/corporate/publications/2018/03/a_review_of_pending_fara_reform_bills.pdf) through the U.S. Congress, and Congressional members invoke FARA as they [question](https://naturalresources.house.gov/uploadedfiles/bishop-westerman_to_nrdc_06.05.18.pdf)
 U.S. NGOs about their foreign ties, observers are pointing out that the
 law’s vague definitions—including what constitutes a “foreign agent”
and what it means to act at the “request” of a “foreign principal”—mean
that a wide range of non-profit and charitable organizations could be
compelled to register under the law.

FARA has an international dimension as well. As [explained](http://www.icnl.org/programs/US%20Programs/FARA%20briefing_Final_c.pdf)
 by the International Center for Not-for-Profit Law, a number of
countries have used FARA to justify “legislation targeting civil society
 groups that receive international funding&hellip; While FARA has
traditionally been narrowly enforced in the United States and it has
critical differences with legislation in other countries, FARA’s broad
language has made it easy for foreign governments to draw parallels
between their legislation and U.S. law.”

Yet, until and unless FARA sees a serious change in its
interpretation, enforcement, or its actual provisions, non-American NGOs
 operating in the United States will largely be treated the same as
their domestically-incorporated counterparts. In this case, China’s
Foreign NGO Law remains substantively different from the regulations
governing non-profits in the United States and Hong Kong, not least in
its explicit bifurcation of domestic and international groups.

Thus, a foreign NGO that opens a branch in Hong Kong has the same
range of options that a local Hong Kong NGO would—it could choose to
register as a company or an unincorporated society, among other options.
 Similarly, in the United States, a foreign NGO is treated largely the
same as a domestic NGO, and is subject to the same registration
requirements (which vary by state). In contrast, the P.R.C. has set out
two different laws governing domestic and foreign NGOs, according them
different privileges and levying different restrictions on their
activities.

\* \* \*

What follows is an overview of the differing legal frameworks in
China, Hong Kong, and the United States as they relate to foreign and
domestic NGOs. These frameworks include provisions related to
registration access, legal status, tax-exemption, government
supervision, and even an NGO’s own agency. This overview is not by any
means exhaustive, but provides some additional details about the
regulatory structures in each location as a means of comparison. Without
 needing to delve into the specifics of each place’s regulations,
however, the most salient difference between the P.R.C.’s regulatory
structure and those of the United States and Hong Kong is simply that
the P.R.C. has a separate set of rules for foreign NGOs while the others
 do not.[<sup>1</sup>](#sdendnote1sym)<a class="anchor" id="sdendnote1anc"></a>


### Foreign NGOs in Hong Kong


Foreign NGOs in Hong Kong (that is, NGOs with headquarters outside
Hong Kong that are seeking to open an office in Hong Kong) do not have
to undergo special registration procedures separate from those of local
NGOs.

In general, Hong Kong’s NGO-related regulations are relatively
permissive. There are no centralized departments for coordinating
non-profit-related issues. NGOs have a great deal of freedom to operate,
 especially if they do not apply for government funding or tax exempt
status.


#### Definition and Registration

Generally speaking, an entity need only be lawfully established and
comply with legal reporting obligations to operate in Hong Kong. So
while it is not mandatory for NGOs to register as such, they must apply
to the Inland Revenue Department if they wish to receive [tax-exempt status](https://www.elegislation.gov.hk/hk/cap112!en?xpid=ID_1438402585244_004&amp;INDEX_CS=N). Only lawfully-established entities that are established exclusively for [charitable purposes](https://www.ird.gov.hk/eng/tax/ach_tgc.htm)
 are granted tax-exemption. Groups incorporated as companies may also
receive tax-exemption if they exclusively work as a charity.

This means there is no precise statutory definition of NGOs under Hong Kong law.[<sup>2</sup>](#sdendnote2sym)<a class="anchor" id="sdendnote2anc"></a> For a group seeking charitable status, [case law](http://203.55.28.185/sites/default/files/file_manager/1891_ac_531.pdf) may be used to determine whether or not the group meets the criteria to be considered a charity.

Groups that wish to hold public fundraising activities, hold a
lottery, or provide services in certain fields (such as health care or
education) must seek [permits from other departments](http://www.hkreform.gov.hk/en/docs/rcharities_e.pdf), such as the Social Welfare Department or the Home Affairs Department.

#### Organizational Structure


NGOs in Hong Kong generally choose to incorporate in one of the following [four forms](http://www.hkreform.gov.hk/en/docs/rcharities_e.pdf):
1. an unincorporated association registered as a [society](https://www.elegislation.gov.hk/hk/cap151!en?xpid=ID_1438402724927_002&amp;INDEX_CS=N)
1. a company
1. a statutory body under a specific ordinance, e.g. [Po Leung Kuk](http://www.poleungkuk.org.hk/en/), which is a social service provider
1. a trust

The first and second forms are the most common and therefore this section will focus on them.

***Societies*** are regulated by the Hong Kong Police
Force under the Societies Ordinance, which means the Police Force is the
 registration authority for this type of group. Charities can either
apply to register as a society or seek exemption from registration. NGOs
 of this type cannot enjoy legal entity status and therefore cannot
carry out various legal actions, including entering into contracts. At
the same time, due to limited statutory control, the operation of
unincorporated societies is more flexible and inexpensive. NGOs that
apply for unincorporated society status generally receive it [unless](https://www.elegislation.gov.hk/hk/cap151!en?xpid=ID_1438402725036_001&amp;INDEX_CS=N)
 they are affiliated with foreign political organizations or are deemed
to endanger national security. (Though the concept of “national
security” is not defined in the Societies Ordinance, the ordinance does
provide protections against arbitrary refusal of registration, such as
the right of applicants to explain why their application should not be
refused, a written explanation of any refusal within 14 days of the
decision, and an appeal mechanism—suggesting that even refusals under
the national security exception can be subject to independent scrutiny.
It also stipulates that societies may continue operations until the
registration process is complete.) Foreign NGOs will also have to
register their Hong Kong branch if they choose to be an unincorporated
society.

***Companies*** are regulated by the Registrar of
Companies. Groups registered as limited companies have a structure
similar to private companies, and they enjoy status as a legal entity.
They must fulfill disclosure requirements as specified in the Companies
Ordinance. One exception to a lack of distinction between domestic and
foreign NGOs is that foreign NGOs have the option to register as a
non-Hong Kong company.


#### Funding, Financial Disclosure, and Monitoring


There are no explicit requirements related to NGO funding in Hong
Kong. As to disclosures of financial statements or other financial
information, groups seeking tax exempt status or the ability to organize
 public fundraising activities must provide financial statements as
requested by relevant government departments, such as the Inland Revenue
 or Social Welfare Departments. NGOs registered as companies must file
their audited accounts to the Companies Registry, but these are not
necessarily [disclosed](http://www.hkreform.gov.hk/en/docs/rcharities_e.pdf)
 to the public. Other types of NGOs are not required to prepare or
disclose annual reports. Unincorporated societies are not required to
file such accounts with the police, for example. NGOs running schools,
hospitals, or government-subsidized services, however, are subject to
greater scrutiny.

#### Penalty for Breach of Laws

NGOs in breach of regulations are subject to legal sanctions based on
 the administrative powers of various government oversight bodies. For
example, the Inland Revenue Department may choose to rescind the
tax-exempt status of an NGO. If an NGO’s legal violations involve
deception, criminal liabilities may also be imposed on senior personnel.


### Foreign NGOs in the United States


There are about [1.5 million](https://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/fs/2017/266904.htm#_ftn1)
 NGOs currently operating in the United States, but as there is no legal
 differentiation between domestic and foreign NGOs in terms of
registration, funding, or management (with the exception of
organizations that the Department of Justice deems must register under
FARA), this section will analyze the regulations that serve as the
general framework for all NGOs in the United States.


#### Definitions and Registration

There is no single, national-level statutory definition of what constitutes an NGO in the United States, but some states [require](https://www.state.gov/j/drl/rls/fs/2017/266904.htm#_ftn1)
 groups with charitable purposes to register with a state charity
official (registration requirements vary by location). Generally, most
states require a description of the structure and the aims of the
organization, the organization’s name, the contact information of an
agent within the state in which the organization intends to operate
primarily, and a small fee. A quick comparison of the general
requirements can be found on the [websites](http://www.hurwitassociates.com/states-reporting-requirements) of agencies and law firms that provide support for NGOs seeking registration.

Even though in some states and under some circumstances there is no
requirement for an NGO to formally incorporate, doing so may offer
certain tax benefits. Tax-exempt status for NGOs is issued at the
federal level, as part of a broader set of regulations governing
organizations eligible for tax benefits. The rules that concern the wide
 variety of American associations, and the related process of
application for tax exempt status, are contained in Title 26, section
501 and the Revised Procedures 2017-5, [2017-1 I.R.B. 230](https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-irbs/irb17-01.pdf), of the Internal Revenue Code (IRC). In addition, the Internal Revenue Service has issued an official publication ([Publication 557](https://www.irs.gov/pub/irs-pdf/p557.pdf)) as a sort of procedural handbook for NGOs’ reference.

Within this framework, there are a variety of different ways to
categorize tax-exempt status; many NGOs can be categorized as 501&copy;(3)
organizations. 501&copy;(3) organizations are defined as being organized
and operated exclusively for religious, charitable, scientific, testing
for public safety, literary, or educational purposes, or to foster
national or international amateur sports, or to prevent cruelty against
children or animals.

Thus, “NGO” does not exist as a standalone regulatory category in the
 United States, but can refer to a wide range of incorporated and
unincorporated organizations, including a number of different
charity-related tax statuses.


#### Filing and Financial Disclosure

Filing and financial disclosure in the form of annual reports is
managed according to the assets, annual gross receipt amounts, and
typology of the organizations that fall within the 501&copy;(3) definition.
 Academic observers [suggest](http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0899764013481111) that disclosure requirements became more rigorous as a response to the 9/11 terrorist attacks.

Generally, institutionalized organizations (such as certain types of
religious and state-run organizations) are not required to submit annual
 information returns. Fewer benefits are granted to those organization
that are private rather than public, and to those that engage in
partisan political activities. Lobbying activities have their own tax
benefit restrictions.

### Foreign NGOs in China


Unlike the United States and Hong Kong, China has specific,
central-level laws that pertain to NGOs. The Chinese government
distinguishes foreign NGOs from domestic ones, and enacted a law
exclusively for foreign NGOs in 2017 (the “<a href="http://www.chinafile.com/ngo/laws-regulations/law-of-peoples-republic-of-china-administration-of-activities-of-overseas">Law
 of the People’s Republic of China on Administration of Activities of
Overseas Nongovernmental Organizations in the Mainland of China</a>”). The Ministry of Civil Affairs is responsible for overseeing domestic charities (as spelled out in 2016’s “[Charity Law](http://www.chinafile.com/ngo/laws-regulations/charity-law-of-peoples-republic-of-china)”),
 while the Ministry of Public Security manages foreign NGO activity.
Chinese regulation of foreign NGOs is more restrictive than that of the
U.S. or Hong Kong, subjecting organizations to many more requirements,
including mandatory registration.


#### Definitions and Registration


The Charity Law defines charitable organizations as non-profit-making, for public benefit, and involving charitable activities, [including](http://www.chinafile.com/ngo/laws-regulations/charity-law-of-peoples-republic-of-china)
 the promotion of development, disaster relief, prevention of pollution,
 etc. Domestic NGOs in China are also obligated to register under the
Charity Law. However, domestic NGOs that fail to do so are not subject
to criminal liability unless they carry out fundraising activities.
Separately, the Foreign NGO Law covers “non-governmental” and
“non-profit-making” organizations established outside mainland China
that engage in public-welfare-related type of work in China. Foreign
NGOs are obligated to register (or, in the case of temporary activities,
 file) under the Foreign NGO Law; failure to do so is grounds for
detaining a foreign NGO’s representatives and stopping funding transfers
 to Chinese partners.


#### Organizational Structure

Foreign NGOs can register in one of the two following ways under the Foreign NGO Law:


***Establish a Representative Office***

This structure is for NGOs who wish to have a permanent presence in
China. Representative offices can work nationwide or just in specified
provinces, depending on the terms of their registration, and do not need
 a Chinese Partner Unit to initiate any particular project or service.
They are still subject, however, to supervision by a Chinese government
entity that acts as their Professional Supervisory Unit. To apply for
registration, foreign NGOs must submit extensive documentation regarding
 their operations, finance, and chief representative. Representative
offices do not have legal standing and the headquarters of foreign NGOs
bear ultimate responsibility for their representative offices’
activities. Foreign NGOs must also have two prior years of work history
overseas before they can apply to establish an office in China.

***File for Temporary Activities***

This structure is for NGOs who do not wish to have a permanent
presence in China. To file for a temporary activity, a foreign NGO must
hold the activity in conjunction with a Chinese Partner Unit, and the
details of the particular project must be submitted in advance to the
appropriate provincial or national public security office. Temporary
activities may not last longer than one year; foreign NGOs must file
again if they wish to continue carrying out an activity for more than
one year.


#### Funding, Financial Disclosure, and Monitoring

Foreign NGO representative offices may apply for employment permits
or tax benefits, which are not available to NGOs only carrying out
temporary activities. Representative offices bear greater administrative
 burdens, such as providing annual plans and reports to their
Professional Supervisory Units and Public Security authorities and
adopting Chinese accounting standards. Professional Supervisory Units
are legally entitled to monitor representative offices’ activities.

All foreign NGOs are forbidden from fundraising in China, required to
 use a designated bank account for transfers across the border, and are
prohibited to solicit membership in China.

#### Penalty for Breach of Laws

The law mandates that foreign NGOs that violate the Foreign NGO Law
be de-registered; their representatives may also be detained. Foreign
NGOs are criminally liable if such violations involve endangering
national security, mishandling public money, or engaging in illegal
political/religious activities. The authorities also have the power to
expel foreign NGOs from China. Public security authorities may
investigate and public security departments may seize assets/facilities
of foreign NGOs when they suspect the representative offices have
violated the law.

--- <br>

[<sup>1</sup>](#sdendnote1anc)<a class="anchor" id="sdendnote1sym"></a> The theoretical framework for this comparison makes use of Bloodgood et al.’s definition in their article “[National Styles of NGO Regulation](http://journals.sagepub.com/doi/abs/10.1177/0899764013481111)” (Nonprofit and Voluntary Sector Quarterly,
 2014) of a restrictive or permissive model based on the accessibility
enjoyed by NGOs on the aforementioned levels of analysis.
[<sup>2</sup>](#sdendnote2anc)<a class="anchor" id="sdendnote2sym"></a> Gallagher, Steven, Equity, and Trusts in Hong Kong: Doctrines, Remedies and Institutions, Sweet &amp; Maxwell, Hong Kong, September, 2017, p.219-220 (not available online).
